Crandall University Crandall University is a small Liberal Arts university located in Moncton, New Brunswick, Canada. Crandall is operated by the Convention of Atlantic Baptist Churches. The Charity. Crandall University 106736150RR0001 was registered as a charitable organization in Canada on 1967-01-01. The primary areas in which the charity is now carrying on programs to achieve its charitable purposes, ranked according to the percentage of time and resources devoted to each program area follow: The charity carried on charitable programs to further its charitable purpose(s) (as defined in its governing documents) this fiscal period: Library and Archives. Crandall University houses the Baptist Heritage Center whose 300 artifacts preserve the material history of Atlantic Baptists, the Convention of Atlantic Baptist Churches, and its predecessor organizations. The collection and archives includes objects used in worship services, furniture, musical instruments, church building architecture pictures and printed material. History. The school was founded in 1949 under the name United Baptist Bible Training School (UBBTS), and served as both a secondary school and a Bible school. Over two decades, the focus of the school gradually shifted toward post-secondary programs. In 1968, UBBTS became a Bible and junior Christian liberal arts college, and in 1970 the name was changed to Atlantic Baptist College (ABC). A sustained campaign to expand the school's faculty and improve the level of education resulted in ABC being able to grant full Bachelor of Arts degrees in 1983. Its campus at this time was located along the Salisbury Road, west of Moncton's central business district. The institution moved to a new campus constructed on the Gorge Road, north of the central business district, in 1996. The name was also changed to Atlantic Baptist University, a reflection of expanded student enrollment and academic accreditation. ABU sports teams play under the name "Blue Tide". The institution was the first, and thus far only, English university in Moncton. The "Atlantic Baptist University Act" was passed by the Legislative Assembly of New Brunswick in 2008. In 2009, plans for a $24 million expansion to the campus, including a new academic building, a second residence and a sports complex were unveiled. Construction is currently underway. The expansion will allow the student enrollment to increase to 1200. On August 21, 2009 it was announced that the institution had changed its name to Crandall University in honour of Rev. Joseph Crandall, a pioneering Baptist minister in New Brunswick. In 2011 Crandall University got a new mascot for the changes to the school in 2011. In 2012, Crandall University came under public scrutiny for receiving municipal funds despite being perceived as having an anti-gay hiring policy. Controversy. The University has been criticized for accepting public money (municipal, provincial and federal) to fund programs and expansions to the campus but maintaining a hiring policy which would prohibit gay faculty. A year after the controversy erupted, the University opted to not apply for $150,000 in public funding that it had received annually in order to avoid changing its hiring policy.
