Aarhus Aarhus or Århus () is the second-largest city in Denmark and the country's main port. It is located on the east coast of the Jutland peninsula in the geographical centre of Denmark. By road it lies northwest of Copenhagen, south of Randers and north of Odense. The city proper has 323,893 inhabitants while the inner urban area has 259,754 inhabitants (1 January 2014). Aarhus is the seat of Aarhus Municipality with a population of 1.2 million people in the greater Aarhus area. Aarhus claims the unofficial title of "Capital of Jutland". The bishopric of Aarhus dates back to at least 948, and by the end of the Middle Ages, it was one of Denmark's largest settlements. Trading and seafaring continued to flourish until the 1570s when growth stagnated. Grain exports initiated a new period of prosperity in the mid-18th century. Factories of various types were established and, from 1810, the harbour was expanded. Regular steamship links with Copenhagen began in 1830 and Jutland's first railway was established in 1862 from Aarhus to Randers. While Aarhus became an important railway hub, the harbour provided a sound basis for seafaring and commerce, initiating significant industrial growth in the city in the second half of the 19th century, soon becoming Denmark's largest provincial city. With the establishment of Aarhus University in 1928, the city continued to grow, becoming the most important business centre in Jutland by the 1950s. During World War II, the Gestapo had their Danish headquarters in the city and kept their archives there until they were destroyed during a raid in October 1944. Today Aarhus is Denmark's second most important centre of research and education, and the electronics and metallurgy sectors have also continued to expand. Aarhus Cathedral is the longest cathedral in Denmark with a total length of . The Church of our Lady ("Vor Frue Kirke") was originally built in 1060, making it the oldest stone church in Scandinavia. The City Hall, designed by Arne Jacobsen and Erik Møller, was completed in 1941 in a modern Functionalist style. Aarhus Theatre, the largest provincial theatre in Denmark opposite the cathedral on Bispetorvet, was built by Hack Kampmann in the Art Nouveau style and completed in 1916. Musikhuset Aarhus (concert hall) and Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium (Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg) are also of note, as are its museums including the open-air museum "Den Gamle By", the art museum ARoS, the Moesgård Museum and the women's museum Kvindemuseet. Sports clubs such as Aarhus Gymnastikforening (AGF), Aarhus 1900, Aarhus Fremad and Idrætsklubben Skovbakken are based in Aarhus, and it is home to the basketball team, the Bakken Bears, two American football clubs, Aarhus Frogs and Århus Tigers, and the Division 1-ranked ice hockey team, IK Århus. Aarhus Airport, with only a few scheduled flights each day, is located north-east of Aarhus in Tirstrup but the city is also served by the large international Billund Airport in central Jutland. Aarhus is served by commuter rail services connecting the city with neighbouring towns; the main station is Aarhus Central Station, located in the city centre. The Danish ferry company Mols-Linien connects Aarhus with Zealand. Name. The city was mentioned for the first time in 948 by Adam of Bremen who reported that Reginbrand, bishop of the church of Aarhus, participated in a church meeting in the city of Ingelheim in Germany. In Valdemar's Census Book (1231) the city was called "Arus", and in Icelandic it was known as "Aros", later written as Aars. It is a compound of the two words "ār", genitive of "ā" ("river", Modern Danish "å"), and "ōss" ("mouth", in Modern Icelandic this word is still used for "river delta"). The name originates from the city's location around the mouth of the stream Aarhus Å (Aarhus River). The spelling "Aarhus" is first found in 1406 and gradually became the norm in the 17th century. Aarhus/Århus spelling. With the Danish spelling reform of 1948, "Aa" was changed to "Å". Some Danish cities resisted the new spelling of their names, notably Aalborg and Aabenraa. Contrarily, Århus city council explicitly embraced the new spelling, as it was thought to enhance an image of progressiveness, even though the change was unpopular with some of the city's inhabitants. In 2010, a majority of the city council voted for a name change from "Århus" back to "Aarhus", and the renaming came into effect on January 1, 2011. Mayor at that time Nicolai Wammen argued that the "Aa" spelling would strengthen the city's international profile, help private enterprise and make it easier to access Aarhus on the Internet. The "Aarhus" spelling has, however, always had some use in non-Scandinavian languages. There is considerable opposition to the "Aa" spelling and according to a May 2011 poll 59.8% of the city's inhabitants preferred the "Å" spelling. Although the name on many signs and other physical media still reads "Århus", official informational websites have effectively altered occurrences of "Århus" to "Aarhus". Furthermore, certain geographically affiliated names have been updated to reflect the name of the city. An example is the Aarhus River for which the Danish name has been altered from "Århus Å" to "Aarhus Å". However, in Danish it is still correct to write geographical names with the letter Å, while local councils since 1984 have been allowed to use the Aa spelling as an alternative. When a local authority so decides, most newspapers and state institutions will re-adopt the pre-1948 Aa spelling and the Å spelling will in practice become second-place. However, the official authorities are the Danish Placename Commission and the Danish Language Committee, publisher of the Danish Orthographic Dictionary, which retain "Århus" as the main name, providing "Aarhus" as a new, second option, in brackets. History. Viking Age and before. The bishopric of Aarhus dates back to at least 948, but recent archæological finds under the settlement's old defences indicate the site was inhabited as early as the last quarter of the 8th century, considerably earlier than had been generally supposed. The oldest archaeological findings in Aarhus are glass pearls, which date to the end of the 7th century. Half buried longhouses, used both as homes and workshops for the Vikings, have also been found. In the houses and the adjoining archaeological layers, combs, jewellery and basic multi-purpose tools have been found that indicate the settlement is from approximately the year 900. The finding of six runestones in and around Aarhus indicates the city had some significance around year 1000 as only wealthy nobles traditionally used them. The centre of Aarhus was once a pagan burial site until Aarhus' first church, Holy Trinity Church, a timber structure, was built upon it during the reign of Frode, King of Jutland, around 900. Middle Ages – 18th century. From the end of the 12th century, the streets of the old town were developed at the initiative of Peder Vognsen, who was bishop of Aarhus from 1192 until his death in 1204. Vognsen also began work on the cathedral which was completed in 1300. As a bishopric, Aarhus became a prosperous religious centre in the Middle Ages. The oldest existing charter granting it market town privileges dates from 1441 although the town no doubt enjoyed similar privileges even before it became a bishopric. Despite the status of Aarhus, farming produce from the surrounding area was exported unlawfully from neighbouring ports. It was only in the 16th century that the city's merchants finally gained control. The town grew steadily, the population rising to about 4,000 by 1620. In the 17th century, although Aarhus was still a large city with many rich merchants, its growth came to a standstill as a result of the Swedish wars and competition from Copenhagen. It was only in the middle of the 18th century that it once again began to prosper with trading conditions improving as a result of agriculture in the surrounding area. Grain in particular proved to be a remunerative export. Factories were established in the town and expansion of the harbour began around 1810. 19th century. From the 1830s, there was an even stronger upturn, as factories with steam-driven machinery became ever more productive. Regular steamship links with Copenhagen began in 1830 and Jutland's first railway was established in 1862 from Aarhus to Randers. While Aarhus became an important railway hub, the harbour provided a sound basis for seafaring and commerce, initiating significant industrial growth in the city in the second half of the 19th century. It expanded rapidly, soon becoming Denmark's largest provincial city. The population increased drastically from some 15,000 in 1870 to around 52,000 in 1901. The largest enterprises at the time were Frichs Maskinfabrik (engines), Jern- og Metalstøberi (foundry) and Mønsted Margarinefabrik (margarine). The Ceres breweries was established in 1856 and served as Aarhus local beer for more than 150 years, gradually expanding into what became known as Ceres-grunden (lit.: "the Ceres-grounds"). 20th century – present. For most of the 20th century, Aarhus became essentially an industrial city and commercial port. The harbour underwent a series of expansions and culturally, the city marketed itself as the "Capital of Jutland" expanding many of its cultural institutions like the national library, universities such as Aarhus University, which was established in 1928, the Aarhus Theatre and hospitals. Aarhus continued to grow and by the middle of the century it was still the most important business centre in Jutland. For east and central Jutland, it was also the top financial, educational and cultural centre. While industry continued to grow, the service sector started to develop too. Important new factories included the dockyard of Flydedokken and the oil mill of Århus Oliefabrik. During World War II, Aarhus was occupied by the Germans, who had their headquarters in the former University of Aarhus building. The 577th Volksgrenadier Division was established in Aarhus on 25 August 1944. Its draftees were transferred to the 47th Infantry Division in the September, and the last members left Aarhus on 10 November to fight later on the Western Front. On 31 October 1944 the Aarhus Air Raid saw a "daring, low-level precision bombing attack" on the Gestapo headquarters in Aarhus by 25 Mosquitoes from the Number 140 Wing of the RAF Second Tactical Air Force. Resistance leader Pastor Harald Sandbaek was being held captive in Aarhus at the time. In Aarhus the Gestapo was headed by Eugen Schwitzgebel; the Sicherheitsdienst, led by Obersturmbannführer Lonechun, and the Abwehr, commanded by Oberstleutnant Lutze, were also based there. A reconnaissance mission had been conducted five days prior to the bombing by 544 Squadron. The bomb dropped in the dead centre of the former University of Aarhus building, killing an estimated 150-200 Gestapo members and some 30 Danes, and destroying all of the German files, including those on the Danish resistance. From October 1944 until April 1945, aircraft of the Coastal Command launched an intense anti-shipping campaign targeting ships off the Danish coast between Norway and Germany. One of the principal reasons for this campaign was to target ships which were transferring some 200,000 German soldiers of the 20th Gebirgarmsee from Oslo to Aarhus, to be dispatched by train down through Jutland. In the mid-1970s, the population was decreasing but by the 1980s, it was once again on the rise. The service sector prospered, overtaking trade, industry and crafts as the leading sector of employment. Aarhus became Denmark's second major centre of research and education, although the electronics and metallurgy sectors also continued to expand. Workers began commuting to the city from most of east and central Jutland. By 2007, the population had reached almost 230,000, making Aarhus Denmark's second biggest city. In 1998, the Protocol on Heavy Metals was adopted in Aarhus, and had 36 signatories as of 2004. The protocol addresses the reduction of cadmium, lead and mercury emissions in the interests of environmental protection. Geography. Aathus is located on the Bay of Aarhus in eastern Jutland, northwest of Copenhagen, south of Randers, north of Odense, and southeast of Aalborg by road. Protected by the peninsulas of Mols and Helgenæs to the north and east, the bay has a depth of quite close to the shore, providing a natural harbour. The early settlement was placed on the northern shores of a fjord, that stretched far inland. The fjord no longer exists, having been replaced by the Aarhus River and Brabrand Lake a few kilometres west of the city. The land around Aarhus was once covered by forests, remains of which exist as Marselisborg Forest to the south and Riis Skov to the north. Several larger lakes extend west from the Skanderborg railway junction and rise to heights exceeding at Himmelbjerget. The hilly area around Aarhus consists of a moranial plateau from the last ice age, broken by a complex system of tunnel valleys. The most prominent valleys of this network, are the Aarhus Valley in the south, stretching inland east-west with the Aarhus River, Brabrand Lake and Tåstrup Sø (Tåstrup Lake) and the Egå Valley to the north, with the stream of Egåen, Kasted Mose (Kasted Bog) and Geding Sø (Geding Lake). Much of the two valleys has been drained and subsequently farmed, but recently some of the drainage was removed for environmental reasons. The valley system also include the Lyngbygård Å (Lyngbygård River) in the west and valleys to the south of the city, following erosion channels from the pre-quaternary. By contrast, the Aarhus River Valley and the Giber River Valley are late glacial meltwater valleys. The coastal cliffs along the Bay of Aarhus consist of shallow tertiary clay from the Eocene and Oligocene (57 to 24 million years ago). The harbour, initially to the north of the town, remained on the north bank of the river until 1800. In the 15th century, the town spread to the south side of the river while the north bank was converted into a port area. In the 19th century, the harbour was extended out into the sea with piers stretching out from the coast. Two docks were created in the 19th century at Nordhavnen and in the 20th century Sydhavnen was created to the south. Aarhus Habour has seen large expansions in recent years and is currently a construction site for a broad array of projects. The harbour was and still is predominantly industrial, although recreational and cultural uses have gradually increased. The new city district of Aarhus Docklands is being constructed next to the old marina ("Aarhus Lystbådehavn") in the north harbour. There are plans for several residential and business buildings on newly constructed wharfs. Politics and administration. The city council consists of 31 members elected for 4-year terms. Anybody eligible to vote and residing in Aarhus municipality can run for a seat on the city council. After elections have determined the members of the city council, the council elects a mayor, 2 deputy mayors and 5 councilmen. The Mayor of Aarhus until 2015 is Jacob Bundsgaard of the Social Democrats, who took over from Nicolai Wammen in August 2011. Wammen wanted to focus on the upcoming election for Parliament. The city is divided into six minor administrative bodies which together constitute the magistrate led by the mayor and the five elected councilmen as political and administrative directors. It is the only Danish city with a magistrate structure. The six magistrate departments of the city are the "Mayor's Magistrate", "Social and Employment Magistrate", "Technology and Environment Magistrate", "Health and Social Magistrate", "Culture and Service Magistrate" and "Children and Youth Magistrate" and handle all the day-to-day operations of the city. Aarhus is the seat of Aarhus Municipality. Until the 2007 Danish Municipal Reform, which replaced the Danish counties with five regions, it was also the seat of Aarhus County, which has now been disbanded in favour of Central Denmark Region ("Region Midtjylland") which has its seat located in Viborg. The city is divided into several districts and suburbs with their own postal code (Postdistrikter). Districts (boroughs) inside the second city beltway Ring 2 include Åbyhøj, Aarhus C, Aarhus Docklands (aka Aarhus Ø), Aarhus N, Aarhus V, Højbjerg and Viby. Neighbourhoods and suburbs include Åby, Åbyhøj, Brabrand, Egå, Frederiksbjerg, Gellerup, Hasle, Hasselager, Højbjerg, Holme, Kolt, Marselisborg, Midtbyen, Risskov, Rosenhøj, Skåde, Skæring, Skejby, Slet, Stavtrup, Tilst, Tranbjerg, Trøjborg, Vejlby, Vesterbro and Viby. Environmental planning. Aarhus has increasingly been investing in environmental planning. The City Council has identified a number of targets for the coming years within green areas, the aquatic environment and energy efficiency. The targets are designed to provide the guidelines for green growth in the city. In accordance with national policy, Aarhus aims to be CO2 neutral by 2030, and it is also aiming to become independent of fossil fuels for heating. This political goal has materialized in a Climate Heating Plan, designed to increase multiple-source heat production and the waste and district heating service "AffaldVarme Aarhus" is building a combined heat and power plant running on biofuels. Aarhus has been heavily involved with several large-scale water treatment projects on many levels in the last two decades and more will follow in the future. The initiatives are part of a larger and broader action plan for Aarhus Municipality, that aims for a coherent and holistic administration of the water cycle. This should protect against or clean up previous pollutions and sustain green growth and self-sufficiency. One of the main goals is to deal with the large quantities of excessive nutrients in and around Aarhus, primarily nitrogen and phosphorus. A second goal is to tackle the increasing levels of precipitation brought about by current and future climate change, and a third important goal is to secure fresh, clean and safe drinking water for the future. Aarhus Municipality and the city council have attacked the challenges from different angles in a constructive collaboration with private partners. Many new underground rainwater basins have been built across the city in recent years. The two lakes of Årslev Engsø and Egå Engsø were created in 2003 and 2006 respectively. Large expanses of forest have been planted in vulnerable land areas in order to secure drinking water and avoid groundwater pollution from pesticides and other sources. Since 1988, the New Forests of Aarhus have been developed so as assisting in binding CO2, securing drinking water, protecting the groundwater from pollution, dealing with excessive nutrients, increase the biodiversity of nature, create an attractive countryside for the citizens, providing easy access to nature and offering outdoor activities for the Aarhus citizens. The afforestation plans were realized as a local project in collaboration with private land owners, under a larger national agenda, and there are new afforestation objectives to double the forest cover in Aarhus Municipality, before the year 2030. Demographics. In 1672, Aarhus had a total population of 3474 people. In 1787 the population had only increased marginally to 4052 and in 1801 actually declined slightly to 4012 people. The population began to grow after 1830, with 6765 people recorded in 1834, 7864 in 1845, and 11,009 people in 1860. By 1880 it had more than doubled to 24,831, and again by 1901 to 51,814. By 1935 it had more than doubled again, growing to 113,865 people. In 1950, 153, 546 people were recorded, growing to 199,427 in 1970, although in the 1980s the population declined somewhat, reaching a low of 181,585 in 1981, but it climbed again, and by 1996 it had reached 213,826 people. 228,547 people were recorded living in Aarhus in 2004, and today more than 300,000 people live within the city limits of Aarhus, while an additional 500,000 live in the surrounding local area of the East Jutland region. Aarhus is also a major part of the larger East Jutland metropolitan area with 1,200,000 inhabitants, which makes East Jutland the second most-populated area in Denmark, after the Copenhagen area. The population of Aarhus is both younger and better-educated than the national average. This is often attributed to the high concentration of educational institutions and facilities in the area. However, in January 2014 it was reported that those in the 45-65 age group have been moving into the central area, attracted by its cafés and cultural life. In Aarhus, 14.8% of the population are immigrants (as of 2012), making Aarhus Municipality Denmark's highest region for immigrants outside the Copenhagen area. There was a marked increase in the immigrant community in Aarhus Municipality from 27,783 in 1999 to 40,431 in 2008. Most of the recent immigrants established themselves in Brabant, Hasle and Viby where the percentage of inhabitants with foreign origins rose by 66% since 2000. In Brabrand and Gellerup, two thirds of the population had a non-Danish ethnic background. There was significant immigration from Turkey during the 1990s. Being a comparatively large Danish city, Aarhus has received a fair share of immigrants from various other cultures resulting in ghettos such as Gellerup. The international cultures present in the community are an obvious and visible part of the city's daily life and contribute to many cultural flavours uncommon for the North, such as Bazar Vest, a market with shopkeepers predominantly of foreign descent. Economy. The region is a major producer of agricultural products with many large farms in the outlying districts. Arla Foods, one of the largest dairy groups in Europe, has its headquarters in Aarhus while the Swedish-Danish vegetable oils and fats company, AarhusKarlshamn (AAK), also has a large processing plant in the area. The Ceres breweries was a large employer in Aarhus for more than 150 years, until its recent closure in 2008, when the parent company moved the production to Odense and Faxe. Now the old factory grounds in the city centre, are being redeveloped with a large educational campus, apartments and other minor projects. This new quarter is now known as Ceresbyen (lit.: "The Ceres City"). The first Danish factory for the production of margarine was established in Aarhus in 1883, and in the following decade, the enterprise, Aarhus Oil Factory Ltd (Aarhus Oliefabrik), experimented with using coconut oil as raw material, based on the work of engineer Malthe C. Holst. Hydrogenation was introduced to Aarhus oil in 1911, the first oil in Scandinavia to do so. The margarine industry took off in subsequent decades, with the number of factory employees increasing from 100 in 1896 to 1000 in 1931. The industry spread from Aarhus to other areas of Denmark, rising to 141 factories by the late 1920s, producing a total of 84,000 tons annually. Aarhus Oil became one of the largest Danish oil companies internationally by the mid- 1930s, and also had business interests in Morocco and Syria. Aarhus is home to the headquarters of Dansk Supermarked, Denmark's largest retailer, and to Jysk, a world-wide retailer specializing in household goods, bedding, furniture and interior design. Other large employers include Krifa (a trades union organisation) and 5R, a telemarketing company. Metallurgy and electronics are also important sectors and the city is home to the headquarters of leading retailing companies. Port of Aarhus. Aarhus Habour has seen large expansions in recent years and is currently a very active construction site for a broad array of projects. The harbour was and still is predominantly industrial, although recreational and cultural uses have gradually increased there recently. The new city district of Aarhus Docklands is being constructed next to the old marina of Aarhus Lystbådehavn in the north harbour, and is planned to comprise several residential and business buildings on newly constructed wharfs. The old wharf that was formerly home to a ship building yard (nicknamed "Dokken"), now houses an array of businesses and cultural projects and organizations in the vacated buildings. In the south, the large recreational marina of Marselisborg Yacht Harbour complete with restaurants, hotels, cafés, etc. was also constructed some years ago. Industrial activities are by no means diminishing in Aarhus Harbour which has expanded recently with large new wharfs, cranes and a new railway line, primarily serving the shipping company of Maersk. The harbour is one of the largest industrial harbours in Northern Europe. It has the largest container terminal in Denmark and accommodates the largest container vessels in the world. The facilities handle some 9.5 million tonnes of cargo a year (2012). Grain is the principal export while feedstuffs, stone and cement, and coal are among the chief imports. The Port of Aarhus is a municipal self-governing port with independent finances. In recent years, the container terminal which still handles over 50% of Denmark's container traffic, has faced increasing competition from Port of Hamburg. In July 2014, Johan Ugla, head of APM Terminals Cargo Service which runs the terminal, announced plans for creating increased efficiency in its operations in order to attract traffic from Danish companies who have been shipping containers to Hamburg by road. Tourism. The ARoS Art Museum, the Old Town Museum and Tivoli Friheden are all among Denmark's top tourist attractions. The city's extensive shopping facilities are also said to be a major attraction for tourists, as are festivals, especially NorthSide and SPOT. Many visitors arrive on cruise ships: in 2012, 18 vessels visited the port with over 38,000 passengers. With expanded facilities, it is hoped there will be as many as 85,000 cruise tourists by 2015. In recent years, there has been a significant expansion of tourist facilities, culminating in the opening of the 240-room Comwell Hotel in July 2014, which will increase the number of hotel rooms in the city by 25%. Some estimates put the number of visitors spending at least one night as high as 750,000 a year, most of them Danes from other regions, the remainder coming mainly from Norway, Sweden, northern Germany and the United Kingdom. Overall, they spend about DKK 3 billion ($540 million) in the city. There are more than 30 tourist information spots across the city, some of them attended by staffs, while other spots are on-line touch screens in the public space. The official tourist information in Aarhus is organized under VisitAaarhus, a corporate fund initiated in 1994 by Aarhus Municipality and the two local commercial interest organizations of Erhverv Århus and Århus City Forening. Hotels, restaurants and bars. Aarhus offers accommodation to travellers on all levels, from cheap to expensive and from private small-scale Bed & Breakfast to luxurious apartment-suites on large international hotels. A couple of large and modern hotels have been built in the last few years, such as the 228-room Scandic Aarhus City hotel near the City Hall from 2012 or the 240-room Comwell Hotel, situated in the 25 storey Aarhus City Tower from 2014. Several hotels in Aarhus are notable. The old Hotel Royal next to the cathedral, with 102 rooms is situated in a building dated to 1838, with neo-baroque façade, and houses the Royal Scandinavian Casino on the bottom floor. The 234-room Radisson Blu Scandinavia Hotel Århus is one of the most modern hotels in the city and Denmark, built in 1995. The hotels of Scandic Plaza, opened in 1930, and the Best Western Ritz Hotel from 1932, are both located at the central station. Also of note, is the 160-room Hotel Helnan Marselis from 1967, at the Marselisborg Forests. The hotel includes fitness and conference facilities, a restaurant and café, as most of the larger hotels in the city, but also an indoor swimming pool. Despite the recent redesigning of the premises, Restaurant Helnan is still considered among the best restaurants in Aarhus. Ferdinand has become an award winning combination of a small high-end hotel, restaurant and lounge bar at the riverside in the city center, since the opening in 2008. Budgetminded travellers can find accommodation at places like the Danhostel Aarhus, Århus City Sleep-in or Cabinn Aarhus hotel. Danhostel Aarhus - situated in the forest of Riis skov -, is located partly in an old historic dance pavilion from 1869, but with modern facilities. The Cabinn hotel is under severe reconstruction until 2015, but will be open all along. The rebuilding is designed by C.F. Møller Architects. Restaurant Margueritten, decorated with old Danish furniture, serves a mixture of Danish, French and Italian cuisine, as does Gastronomica. Restaurant Frederikshøj overlooking the bay and Marselisborg Forest serves gourmet dishes in elegant yet modern surroundings. Several bars and taverns in Aarhus cater for night revelers, including the Train dance club, Thorups Kælder, a bar originally founded in the 13th century by Cisternian monks, Café Under Masken, next to the Royal hotel, with iron sculptures designed by local artist Hans Krull, and the Billabong Bar, an Australian bar. The Bryggerient Sct. Clemens brewery and public house and the LGBT Pan Club on Jægergårdsgade are also of interest. Research parks. Over the past ten years, Aarhus has been one of Denmark's most rapidly developing centres of activity, covering areas such as information technology, energy, media, life sciences, food, architecture and design. Enterprises in the Information and communications technology (ICT) sphere are progressing well, especially in collaboration with the city's research institutes. In 2007 the three largest research parks of Forskerpark Aarhus (Science Park Aarhus), Forskerpark Skejby (Science Park - Skejby) and IT-Huset Katrinebjerg, merged to form INCUBA Science Park. Both Forskerpark Skejby, which works in the field of biomedical research, and the Katrinebjerg department - focussing on ICT - has since been expanded and in 2014 the new department of INCUBA Navitas opened on the Aarhus Docklands. One of the major research companies is Systematic A/S, with some 450 employees working in the public sector, healthcare and defence. The IT City Katrinebjerg, fosters collaboration between research, education and industry through the university branches of Alexandra Institutet, Department of Computer Science and Department of Aesthetics and Communication. In the clean energy sector, Aarhus is home to leading participants including Vestas, AVK, Amplex and Kamstrup. Navitas Park is a new information and innovation park bringing together players in the energy, environment and building sectors. Located in the Docklands area, the centre is sponsored by Aarhus University School of Engineering, Aarhus School of Marine and Technical Engineering (AAMS) and INCUBA. Cityscape. Churches. Aarhus Cathedral ("Århus Domkirke") is the longest cathedral in Denmark with a total length of . It was originally built as a Romanesque basilica in the 13th century but was rebuilt and enlarged as a Gothic cathedral in the late 15th and early 16th centuries. It has a notable altarpiece sculpted by Bernt Notke from Lübeck in 1479, cited as one of the finest in the country. The cathedral also has more frescos than any other church in Denmark, all painted between 1470 and 1520. The Church of our Lady ("Vor Frue Kirke") includes a crypt church discovered and restored in the 1950s, which was built in 1060, making it the oldest stone church in Scandinavia. Originally known as St Nicholas' Church ("Skt. Nicolai Kirke"), it was the first cathedral in Aarhus. The church's stonework was used to build a Dominican priory in 1240. Today's church occupies the south wing of the priory. The building exhibits a combination of Romanesque and Gothic architecture. The tower, with its characteristic onion-shaped top with a lantern and pointed spire was completed in the 17th century. City hall, palaces and theatres. The City Hall ("Aarhus Rådhus"), designed by Arne Jacobsen and Erik Møller, was completed in 1941 in a modern Functionalist style. Initially, their plans covered the three main sections but there was no tower. As a result of criticism, the architects added the iconic tower without a spire. Built of concrete, the building is clad in marble outside and inside with bronze and wood. Marselisborg Palace ("Marselisborg Slot") is the summer retreat of the Danish royal family. Located to the south of the city centre close to the bay, the estate was donated by the city of Aarhus to Prince Christian and Princess Alexandrine as a wedding present in 1898. The gift included the palace, completed in 1902, which was designed by the prolific Aarhus architect, Hack Kampmann. With its palacial white façade and external decorations, it combines the Neoclassical and Art Nouveau styles. Although the palace is not open to the public, the extensive park designed in the English style by landscape architect L. Christian Diedrichsen may be visited when the royal couple are not in residence. Aarhus Theatre, opposite the cathedral on Bispetorvet, was built by Hack Kampmann in the Art Nouveau style and completed in 1916. It is the largest provincial theatre in Denmark. The green and gold decorations in the main auditorium, which include a wreath of swans on the ceiling, are the work of Karl Hansen Reistrup. Over the years additional facilities have been added including the Scala, with seating for 285 people, and the flexible Studio and Stiklingen rooms which can seat between 80 and 100. The theatre is well known throughout Denmark for its restaurant Café Hack (named after the architect) which has been the venue for a popular Sunday morning radio programme for a number of years. Musikhuset (The Concert Hall of Aarhus) and Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium (The Jutlandic music conservatory) are also of note. Historic buildings. The inner city has the oldest preserved houses of Aarhus, especially the streets of Skolegade and Mejlgade in the Latin Quarter. Thestrup's House, at No. 19 Mejlgade, is the oldest of all, dating back to 1625. The low, half-timbered buildings at No. 15 to 17 Skolegade, are from 1642. There are also some fine Neoclassical buildings on the street, while Bagge Lihme's House at No. 6 Mejlegade, completed in 1811, is one of the finest examples of the Empire period in the city. Attached to the cathedral, the cathedral school Aarhus Katedralskole was erected in 1195. Situated in Skolegade, it ranks as the 44th oldest school in the world but only small parts of the present buildings are from the twelfth century. An ancient crypt church from 1060, beneath (and predating) the Church of Our Lady, was discovered and restored in the 1950s. The Aarhus Custom House ("Toldkammeret") on the harbour front, completed in 1898, is said to be Hack Kampmann's finest work. It was used by the tax authorities until the mid-1990s. Tækker Group, who purchased the building in 2004, have fully renovated the building in collaboration with the cultural authorities, taking care to maintain the Kampmann style. After being used in recent years by the architecture school and as a student hostel, the building now houses the Jensen's Bøfhus restaurant. The early buildings of Aarhus University, especially the main building completed in 1932, have gained an international reputation for their contribution to functionalist architecture. Now included in the Danish Culture Canon, the yellow-brick buildings were designed by Kay Fisker, Povl Stegmann and, above all, by C.F. Møller, giving Danish architecture a new impetus. The architectural style combining international modernism with Danish traditions, provided a basis for Danish architecture until the mid-1950s. Museums. "Den Gamle By" (The Old Town), officially "Danmarks Købstadmuseum" (Denmarks Market Town Museum), is the only open-air museum in the country which presents life in market towns from the 17th century to the present. It consists of some 75 houses from various parts of Denmark which have been brought together to provide a picture of a traditional market town. The interiors have also been restored with original furnishings. One of the latest additions is "Møntmestergården" (the Mintmaster's Mansion) from 1683 which originally stood in Copenhagen. Currently the museum is being extended with an area devoted to town life in the 1920s and 1930s. Aarhus City Museum ("Århus By Museum") recently relocated to "Den Gamle By" operates as an archive for historical information and presents changing exhibits on the history of the city. ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, the city's main art museum, has a history going back to 1858. Now housed in a building designed by Schmidt, Hammer & Lassen in 1997, it is one of the largest art museums in Scandinavia with a collection covering Danish art from the 18th century to the present day as well as paintings and sculptures by international artists. The new cube-shaped building with floor space of is centred around a curved museum street and can be accessed via a spiral staircase at its midpoint. The Moesgård Museum, which has occupied several sites since it was established in 1861, is a local museum and institution specializing in archaeology and ethnography in collaboration with the Culture and Society department of Aarhus University. Permanent exhibits on Denmark's prehistory, include weapon sacrifices from Illerup Ådal and the Grauballe Man, the world's best preserved bog body, about 2,300 years old. The museum is currently closed during relocation from Moesgård Manor to new and larger premises nearby, where it will reopen in October 2014. Kvindemuseet, the Women's Museum, contains collections presenting the lives and work of women in Danish cultural history. Starting as a grassroots movement in the 1980s, the museum has developed outreach programmes with other museums in Denmark and abroad. Established in 1984, it is located in the former city hall (built in 1857) on Domkirkeplads, now fully renovated. Other speciality museums in Aarhus include: "Besættelsesmuseet" (Occupation Museum), located in the same house as The Women's Museum and presenting exhibits illustrating the German occupation of the city during the Second World War; The University Park and campus of Aarhus University, presents three important museums: "Naturhistorisk Museum" (Natural History Museum), with over 5,000 species of animals, many in their natural surroundings; Steno Museum, a museum of the history of science and medicine together with a planetarium; and the little known "Antikmuseet" (Museum of Antiquity), with a fine collection of Greek, Etruscan and Roman art. Kunsthal Aarhus (Aarhus Art Hall) in the city centre is a large exhibition venue, renovated and extended by C.F. Møller Architects from the 1990s. It hosts solo and group exhibitions of contemporary art including special presentations for children. In addition to painting, it covers sculpture, photography, installations, performance art, film and video. Parks. There are an unusually high number of parks in in Aarhus, 134 of them, covering a total area of around . The Botanical Gardens ("Botanisk Have") are located in the centre of the city just west of "Den Gamle By". The largest and oldest of the city's parks, it originated in 1873 when it was used to cultivate fruit trees and other useful plants for the local inhabitants. It still has a significant collection of trees and bushes as well as a section devoted to Danish plants from different habitats and regions. Its recently renovated tropical and subtropical greenhouses, initially designed by C.F. Møller, exhibit exotic plants from throughout the world. The Memorial Park ("Mindeparken") on the coast near Marselisborg Palace, is popular with locals for outings with family and friends, often with a picnic box. The park dates from 1925, when it was opened by King Christian X and now contains a monument designed by Axel Poulsen and Axel Ekberg, commemorating Danes who fell in the First World War. The park offers a panoramic view across the bay of Aarhus, with Skødshoved and Mols beyond. In the same area, Marselisborg Deer Park ("Marselisborg Dyrehave"), established in 1932, now extends over of woodland pastures, after several extensions. It was originally intended to hold sheep to keep the grass short, but in the end sika deer and roe deer were chosen instead. Friheden is an amusement park, similar to Copenhagen's Tivoli Gardens. Established in 1904, the pleasure park was extended with additional attractions after the Second World War. Located to the south of the city centre on Skovbrynet in the Marselisborg Forests at the far end of Stadion Allé, the park also hosts concerts, and has a revue theatre and several restaurants. It is open to visitors in the summer months. The undulating University Park was designed in the 1930s together with the university's first buildings. Marienlystparken in Herredsvang, one of the largest parks in the city, has both wooded areas and open grasslands as well as a golf course and a football field. There are also several small but notable parks in the city, like City Hall Park ("Rådhusparken"), established together with the city hall in 1941. Culture. Selected as European Capital of Culture in 2017, Aarhus prides itself on offering a combination of innovation, media and communication together with architecture and design, and has a wide variety of cultural institutions. The city of Aarhus has strong musical traditions, both classical and modern, with educational and performance institutions such as the concert halls of Musikhuset, the opera of Den Jyske Opera (sometimes referred to as the Danish National Opera), Aarhus Symfoniorkester (Aarhus Symphony Orchestra) and Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium (Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg). Musikhuset presents the largest concert hall in Scandinavia, with seating for 3,000 people. Other major music venues include VoxHall, rebuilt in 1999, the recently opened Atlas, and Godsbanen, a former railway station. Since the 1970s, the city has seen major developments on the rock scene, with the arrival of many acclaimed bands such as Under Byen, Gnags, TV-2, Michael Learns to Rock, Nephew, Carpark North, Spleen United, VETO, Hatesphere and Illdisposed in addition to popular individual performers like Thomas Helmig, Anne Linnet and Medina. Since 2010 the music production centre of PROMUS ("Produktionscentret for Rytmisk Musik"), has supported the rock scene in the city along with the publicly funded ROSA ("Dansk Rock Samråd"), who promotes Danish rock music in general. Each year, the city hosts several music festivals and concerts, including NorthSide Festival attracting international artists and young spectators, the eight-day Aarhus International Jazz Festival and the wide-ranging Aarhus Festuge, the largest multicultural festival in Scandinavia always based on a special theme. The acting scene in Aarhus is diverse, with many groups and venues including Aarhus Teater, Svalegangen, EntréScenen, Katapult, Gruppe 38, Godsbanen, Helsingør Teater, Det Andet Teater and Teater Refleksion as well as several dance venues like Bora Bora and Granhøj Dans. The city hosts a biannual international theatre festival, International Living Theatre, with the next event taking place in May 2015. The former goods station of Aarhus Godsbanegård has recently been thoroughly renovated and expanded with a new building. Now known as Godsbanen, it functions as a cultural center, and offers numerous workshops for the artist community and local citizens. Aarhus presents some important library institutions and they take an active role in the cultural life of the city. The State and University Library ("Statsbiblioteket"), which has the status of a national library, plays a key role in coordinating the online development of Danish libraries including digital access to newspapers and media. The public libraries offer extensive traditional and digital services and can be used by citizens 24 hours a day, whether at the central library in Mølleparken or via the many branch libraries throughout the city. Most of the libraries also work as community centres. The city actively promotes its visible gay and lesbian community. The Aarhus Festuge festival usually includes several exhibits, concerts or events specifically designed for these communities. There are several clubs, discos and cafes aimed at gays and lesbians, including Danish D-lite (sports), G bar (disco) or Gaia Vandreklub (hiking club). Sports. There is an active sports life in Aarhus on all levels, with many accessible facilities for both amateurs and professionals. Aarhus has several major and historic sports clubs like Aarhus 1900, Aarhus Gymnastikforening (AGF), Aarhus Fremad and Idrætsklubben Skovbakken and a plethora of smaller clubs. There are several soccer grounds in the city, four indoor swimming pools and several sports stadiums. Vejlby Risskov Idrætscenter, the largest sports centre in Aarhus (and eastern Jutland), located in Vejlby, comprises a large stadium and training areas with facilities for a wide variety of sports, such as tennis, association football, athletics, basket, swimming, handball, gymnastics and badminton. Running second, is the sports centre of Atletion in the south of the city on the outskirts of the Marselisborg Forests. The Atletion centre comprises athletics, the football NRGi Park and the indoor sports NRGi Arena. Several sport clubs have their home ground in Atletion, including AGF Århus, the Danish superliga football team, and Aarhus GF handball team, the 1960 European Cup runner-up. Close to Atletion there is a racecourse for horse racing and an outdoor cycling arena. Watersports like kayaking and rowing, have been a part of Aarhus sports culture for many years, based both at the Brabrand Lake and in the Marselisborg Forests overlooking Aarhus Bay.The local basketball team Bakken Bears has been one of the most successful teams in Denmark for the past decade. There are also two American football clubs in the city: Aarhus Frogs and Århus Tigers. At Christiansbjerg there is an iceskating hall and Aarhus has a Division 1 ranked ice hockey team, IK Århus. Golf can be played at a number of golf courses to the south, west and north of the city. The martial arts scene is very diverse and offers training in many of the popular sports like karate, taekwondo, kick boxing and wrestling, but also in some less well-known disciplines such as krav maga, capoeira and ninjutsu. The Laurentius Guild, established in 2004, is a small historical European martial arts group whose members are all from Aarhus University, mainly those specializing in medieval archaeology. Aarhus has hosted many sporting events including the 2010 European Women's Handball Championship, the 2014 European Men's Handball Championship, the 2013 Men`s European Volleyball Championships, the 2005 European Table Tennis Championships, the Denmark Open in badminton, the UCI Women's Road Cycling World Cup, the 2006 World Orienteering Championships, the 2006 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships and the GF World Cup (women's handball). In recent decades, many smaller sports facilities have sprung up across the city, such as street football, basketball, climbing walls, skateboarding and beach volley. Several natural sites also offer green exercise, with exercise equipment installed across the paths or tracks for mountainbiking. The newly reconstructed area of Skjoldhøjkilen is a prime example. Education. Aarhus is a centre for education in the Jutland region. It draws students from a large area, especially from the western and southern parts of the peninsula. The relatively large influx of young people and students creates a natural base for cultural activities. Aarhus has the greatest concentration of students in Denmark, fully 12% of those living there attending short, medium or long courses of study. In addition to around 25 institutions of higher education, several research forums have evolved to assist in the transfer of expertise from education to business. As of January 1, 2012 Aarhus University (AU) was the largest university in Denmark by the number of students enlisted. It is ranked among the top 100 universities in the world by several of the most influential and respected rankings. The university has approximately 41,500 Bachelor and Master students enlisted and further about 1,500 Ph.D. students. It is possible to receive higher education in many areas, from engineering and dentistry to language and theology. Aarhus Technical College is one of the largest business academies in Denmark, and teaches undergraduate study programmes in English, including vocational education and training (VET), continuing vocational training (CVT), and human resource development. The Danish School of Media and Journalism (DMJX) is the oldest and largest of the colleges which teach journalism education in Denmark, offering courses in journalism since 1946. As of 2014 it had approximately 1700 students. In 1974 it became an independent institution conducting research and teaching at the undergraduate level. In 2004, the school collaborated with Aarhus University to establish the Centre for University studies in Journalism, offering master’s courses in journalism, and granting degrees through the AU. The Royal Academy of Music in Aarhus ("Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium") is a conservatoire which was established under the auspices of the Danish Ministry of Culture in 1927. In 2010 it merged with the Royal Academy of Music in Aalborg, which was founded in 1930. Under the patronage of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Frederik, it offers graduate level studies in areas such as music teaching, and solo and professional musicianship. VIA University College, established in January 2008, is one of eight new regional organizations offering bachelor courses of all kinds throughout the Central Denmark Region. It offers over 50 higher education in Danish or sometimes in English, with vocational education and participating in various research and development projects. Aarhus School of Architecture ("Arkitektskolen Aarhus") was founded in 1965. Along with the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts of Copenhagen, it is responsible for the education of architects in Denmark. With an enrollment of approximately 900 students, it teaches in five main departments: architecture and aesthetics, urban and landscape, architectonic heritage, design and architectural design Also of note is KaosPilots and several other higher education centres. Transport. Aarhus Airport, with only a few scheduled flights each day, is located north-east of Aarhus in Tirstrup. The much larger Billund Airport is situated south-west of Aarhus. There has been much discussion about constructing a better airport for Aarhus, but so far, the plans have not been realized. The main railway station in Aarhus is Aarhus Central Station located in the city centre. DSB has connections to destinations throughout Denmark and beyond. Two local railways provide commuter services to Lernvig and Odder. The Aarhus Letbane is a planned tram-train project which will link two railway lines with a new light rail route through the city. Most city bus lines go through the inner city and pass through either Park Alle or Banegårdspladsen (lit. English: "Central Station Square") or both. County and Inter-city buses terminate at Aarhus Bus Terminal which is located 900 meters north-west of Banegårdspladsen, and in front of the Radisson SAS Scandinavia hotel at Margrethepladsen. The long-distance busses of "linie888" connect Aarhus to other cities in Jutland and Zealand. The Danish ferry company Mols-Linien connects Aarhus with Copenhagen, on the island of Zealand, with rapid ferry connections to Sjællands Odde and Kalundborg. Mols-Linien was formed by DFDS in 1964, and sailings commenced on 18 May 1966. In 1984 DFDS sold Mols-Linien and Grenaa-Hundested Linien to J. Lauritzen A/S. The company was sold four years later to Danish investment company DIFKO. In 1999 Mols-Linien merged with Scandlines subsidiary Cat-Link, who sold its holding to the Clipper Group in 2008. Mols-Linien closed the Aarhus - Kalundborg route on 15 September 2011. Thereafter the route was operated by Kattegatruten until October 2013. Operating ferries between Aarhus and Odden include "HSC Max Mols" and "HSC KatExpress 1", the world's largest diesel powered catamaran. The ferries transport both private vehicles and the line888 buses. Aarhus has a free bike sharing system, "Aarhus Bycykler" (Aarhus City Bikes). The bicycles are available from 1 April to 30 October at 57 stands throughout the city and can be obtained by placing a DKK 20 coin in the release slot, just like caddies in a supermarket. The coin can be retrieved when the bike is returned. Bicycles can also be hired from many shops. Healthcare. Aarhus University Hospital is one of the country's most specialized hospitals with sophisticated equipment and highly qualified staff. For each of the past three years, it has been ranked as Denmark's best hospital. The new hospital founded in 2011 has some 1,150 beds and a staff of about 10,000. It is the result of a merger between the former Århus Universitetshospital, Århus Sygehus and Skejby Sygehus. In the spring of 1999 the university hospital in conjunction with the Aarhus county authorities founded the Research Clinic for Functional Disorders and Psychosomatics. The hospital collaborates with the Psychiatric Hospital in Risskov, which also conducts psychiatric research. In October 2009, work started on the construction of a large new hospital and headquarters in Skejby, on what has become the largest construction site in Denmark. Scheduled to be completed in 2019, the New University Hospital (DNU) will be the largest hospital in the country and will serve patients from all over Central Denmark Region. Ciconia Aarhus Private Hospital is a leading Danish fertility clinic with a significant sperm bank. Originally founded in 1984, it opened as the first clinic of its kind in Denmark. Ciconia has provided for the birth of 6,000 children by artificial insemination and continually conducts research into the field of fertility. Aagaard Klinik, established in April 2004, is another private clinic in the city which specializes in fertility and gynaecology. As of 2013 it had treated 2,920 patients and were responsible for the birth of 1,900 children through fertility treatment. Aarhus Municipality also offers a number of specialized services in the areas of nutrition, exercise, sex, smoking and drinking, activities for the elderly, health courses and life style. Media. Established in 1871, the daily newspaper "Jyllandsposten" (today known as "Jyllands-Posten") takes a generally right-wing editorial approach. With a reputation as a serious news publication, the paper has always included news from Jutland, somewhat less so since its promotion as a national newspaper ("Morgenavisen Jyllands-Posten") in the 1960s. Today it is one of the three leading serious newspapers in Denmark, the others being "Berlingske" and "Politiken". The first daily newspaper in Aarhus was "Århus Stiftstidende", once one of Denmark's largest, established in 1794 as "Aarhuus Stifts Adresse-Contoirs Tidender". With a moderately conservative approach, for a time it was a leading provincial newspaper but after the Second World War it increasingly faced competition from "Demokraten" (1884-1974) and "Jyllands-Posten", both published in Aarhus. In 1998, it merged with "Randers Amtsavis" and is now run by Midtjyske Medier, part of Berlingske Media. Danmarks Radio has a large department in Aarhus with over 200 employees. It runs the DR Østjylland radio programme, provides local contributions to DR P4, and produces local regional television programmes. In 1990, TV 2 established its Jutlandic headquarters in Randers but moved to Skejby in northern Aarhus in 1999. The station broadcasts regional news and current affairs television and radio programmes. Since 2012, it has run its own TV channel, TV 2 Østjylland. Aarhus has its own local TV channel TVAarhus, transmitting since 1984. After an agreement on 1 July 2014, TVAarhus can be watched by 130.000 households in Aarhus, making it the largest cable transmitted local TV channel in Denmark. With over 1,700 students, The Danish School of Media and Journalism ("Danmarks Medie- og Journalisthøjskole") is the country's largest and oldest school of journalism. The school works closely with Aarhus University where the first journalism course was established in 1946. In 2004, the two institutions established the Centre for University Studies in Journalism, which offers master's courses. Twin towns — Sister cities. Aarhus is twinned with seven cities: Originally the cities had most co-operation within the public school, culture and welfare sectors, but now the co-operation is extended to also cover commercial interests. The cities are: Notable people. Politics Science Sports Music and culture Literature
