Akihabara Akihabara gained the nickname shortly after World War II for being a major shopping center for household electronic goods and the post-war black market. Nowadays, Akihabara is considered by many to be an otaku cultural center and a shopping district for video games, anime, manga, and computer goods. Icons from popular anime and manga are displayed prominently on the shops in the area, and numerous maid cafés are found throughout the district. Geography. The main area of Akihabara is located on a street just west of Akihabara Station, where most of the major shops are situated. Most of the electronics shops are just west of the station, and the anime and manga shops and the cosplay cafés are north of them. History. The area that is now Akihabara was once near a city gate of Edo and served as a passage between the city and northwestern Japan. This made the region a home to many craftsmen and tradesmen, as well as some low class samurai. One of Tokyo’s frequent fires destroyed the area in 1869, and the people decided to replace the buildings of the area with a shrine called Chinkasha, meaning fire extinguisher shrine, in an attempt to prevent the spread of future fires. The locals nicknamed the shrine Akiba after a deity that could control fire, and the area around it became known as Akibagahara and later Akihabara. In 1890, the Akihabara Station became a major freight transit point, which allowed a vegetable and fruit market to spring up in the district. Then, in the 1920s, the station saw a large volume of passengers after opening for public transport, and after World War II, the black market thrived in the absence of a strong government. This disconnection of Akihabara from government authority has allowed the district to grow as a market city and given rise to an excellent atmosphere for entrepreneurship. In the 1930s, this climate turned Akihabara into a future-oriented market region specializing in household electronics, such as washing machines, refrigerators, televisions, and stereos, earning Akihabara the nickname "Electric Town". As household electronics began to lose their futuristic appeal in about the 1980s, the shops of Akihabara shifted their focus to home computers at a time when they were only used by specialists and hobbyists. This new specialization brought in a new type of consumer, computer nerds or "otaku". The market in Akihabara naturally latched onto their new customer base that was focused on anime, manga, and video games. The connection between Akihabara and otaku has survived and grown to the point that the region is now known worldwide as a center for otaku culture, and most otaku even consider Akihabara to be a sacred place. Akihabara massacre. On Sunday, June 8, 2008 at 12:33 JST, a man drove into a crowd with a truck, then stabbed at least 12 people using a dagger. Seven died and ten were injured. Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department arrested , 25, on suspicion of attempted murder, later being re-arrested weeks later on suspicion of murder. Kato was eventually sentenced to death by the Tokyo District Court in 2011, and the sentence was upheld on appeal in 2012. "Otaku" culture. The influence of "otaku" culture has shaped Akihabara's businesses and buildings to reflect the interests of "otaku" and gained the district worldwide fame for its distinctive imagery. Akihabara tries to create an atmosphere as much like the game and anime worlds the customers are used to as is possible. The streets of Akihabara are covered with anime and manga icons, and cosplayers line the sidewalks handing out advertisements, especially for maid cafés. Release events, special events, and conventions in Akihabara give anime and manga fans frequent opportunities to meet the creators of the works they follow so closely and strengthen the connection between the region and "otaku" culture. The design of many of the buildings serves to create the sort of atmosphere that draws in "otaku". Architects design the stores of Akihabara to be more opaque and closed to reflect the general desire of many "otaku" to live in their anime worlds rather than display their interests to the world at large. Because "otaku" culture is considered by some to be unusual, some controversies have sprung up as a result of Akihabara's public display of the culture. Since "otaku" are primarily male, and because of the nature of the medium, Akihabara contains some depictions of sexualized female characters. The abundance of cosplay and maid cafés also puts young women in a position of taking requests from the male customers they serve, though they fully consent to do so. Akihabara's role as a free market has also allowed a large amount of amateur work to find a passionate audience in the otaku who frequent the area. "Doujinshi" (amateur manga) has been growing in Akihabara since the 1970s when publishers began to drop manga that were not ready for large markets.
